BIP 181, 182, 183: BIPs for Utreexo (#1923)
bitcoin/bips: utreexo-validation-bip.md

from our peers, we need to commit to this value to avoid malicious peers that
may send over the wrong locking script.

#### Hash function

The leaf data is hashed with SHA-512/256, which gives us a 32 byte hash.
It was chosen over SHA-256 due to the faster performance on 64 bit systems.

#### Excluded UTXOs from the accumulator

Not all transaction outputs are added to a node's UTXO set. Normal Bitcoin nodes
only form consensus on the set of transactions, not on the UTXO set, so different
nodes can omit different outputs and stay compatible as long as those outputs are
never spent. Utreexo nodes, however, do require explicit consensus on the UTXO set
as all proofs are with respect to the Merkle roots of the entire set.

For this reason, we define which UTXOs are not inserted to the accumulator.  Any
variations here will result in Utreexo nodes with incompatible proofs.

##### Provably unspendable transaction outputs

There are outputs in the Bitcoin network that we can guarantee that they cannot
be spent without a hard-fork of the network. The following output types are not
added to the accumulator:
- Outputs that start with an OP_RETURN (0x6a)

> - Outputs with a scriptPubkey larger than 10,000 bytes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Outputs with an output script larger than 10,000 bytes
```

##### Same block spends

Often, UTXOs are created and spent in the same block. This is allowed by Bitcoin
consensus rules as long as the output being spent is created by a transaction earlier
in the block than the spending transaction.
In Utreexo, nodes inspect blocks and identify which outputs are being created
and destroyed in the same block, and exclude them from the accumulator and proofs.

There's no need to provide proofs for outputs which have been created in the same
block. Adding and then immediately removing the output from the accumulator would be

> possible but doesn't serve any purpose - once outputs are spent their past existence

Reviewer: ```suggestion
possible but doesn't serve any purpose - once outputs are spent, their past existence
```

cannot be proven with the Utreexo accumulator (and SPV proofs already provide that).

For these reasons, outputs which are spent in the same block where they are created
are omitted from the accumulator, and those inputs are omitted from block proofs.

#### Order of operations

The Utreexo accumulator lacks associative properties during addition and the
ordering of which UTXO hash gets added first is consensus critical. For
the modification of the accumulator the steps are as follows:

1. Batch remove the UTXOs that were spent in the block based on the algorithm

>    defined in BIP-????. Deletions itself are order-independent.

Reviewer: For the time being, maybe just use `[‎BIP Utreexo Accumulator](‎utreexo-accumulator-bip.md)` to clarify whether you are referring to one or the other.

2. Batch add all non-excluded outputs in the order they're included in the
   Bitcoin block. Additions are order-dependent.

The removal and the addition of the hashes follow the algorithms defined in

> BIP-????.

Reviewer: Ditto

#### Format of the UTXO proof

The UTXO proof has 2 elements: the accumulator proof and the leaf data. The
leaf data provides the necessary UTXO data for block validation that would be
stored locally for non-Utreexo nodes. The accumulator proof proves that the
given UTXO hash preimages are committed in the accumulator.

> Accumulator proof is defined in BIP-????, and contains two elements:

Reviewer: Ditto

1. A vector of positions of the UTXO hashes in the accumulator.
2. A vector of hashes required to hash up to the roots.

> For (1), positions are in the order of the leaves that are being proved in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For (1), positions are in the order of the leaves that are being proven in
```

the accumulator. These are all the inputs in the natural blockchain order that
excludes the same block spends.

The UTXO hash preimages follow the same ordering as (1) in the accumulator
proofs. Each of the positions in (1) refer to the UTXO hash preimage in the same

> index.

Reviewer: For some reason I had thought that the accumulator proof was a Merkle branch, but now reading this, it makes me think that the proofs are built-up from the leaf preimages. Which of the two is correct, and could you perhaps check whether some more clarification should be added here to make it unambiguous? 
This might also just be me mixing up something as I’m trying to puzzle together everything that is going on.

| Field Name          | Data Type           | Byte Size | Description                             |
| ------------------- | ------------------- | --------- | --------------------------------------- |
| Accumulator Proof   | variable byte array | variable  | The Utreexo proof as defined in BIP-????|
| UTXO hash preimages | variable byte array | variable  | The UTXO data needed to validate all the transaction in the block |

#### UTXO proof validation

For each block, the UTXO proof must be provided with the bitcoin block for
validation to be possible. Without the UTXO proof, it's not possible to
validate that the inputs being referenced exists in the UTXO set.

> The end result of the UTXO proof validation results us in the vector of UTXO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The end result of the UTXO proof validation results in the vector of UTXO
```

hash preimages that are required to perform the rest of the consensus
validation checks. Note that the resulting data from the UTXO proof validation
is the same data that would normally be fetched from the locally stored UTXO
set.

The order of operations for the UTXO proof validation are:

1. Hash the UTXO preimages.
2. Verify that the UTXO preimages exist in the accumulator with the verification
   algorithm specified in BIP-????.

### BIP-0030

[`BIP-0030`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0030.mediawiki) is an added
consensus check that prevents duplicate TXIDs. This check and the historical violations
of this check affect the consensus validation for Utreexo nodes.

### BIP-0030 and BIP-0034 consensus check

Before `BIP-0030`, the Bitcoin consensus rules allowed for duplicate TXIDs. If two

> transactions shared a same TXID, the transaction outputs of the preceding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
transactions shared a same TXID, the transaction outputs of the succeeding
```

transaction would overwrite the previously created UTXOs. It was assumed that
TXIDs were unique but it's trivially easy to create a transaction that share

> the same `TXID` for coinbase transactions by re-using the same bitcoin address.

Reviewer: Nit: It’s not just that the TXID is the same, the entire transaction is the same.

`BIP-0030` check is a consensus check that enforces that newly created transactions

> do not have outputs that overwrites an existing UTXO.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
do not have outputs that overwrite an existing UTXO.
```

> `BIP-0034` was a rule where the block height was included in the script signature

Reviewer: What was called originally "generator transaction" is now more familiarly referred to as a "coinbase transaction" after the "scriptSig" equivalent being called "coinbase field" in that context.

```suggestion
`BIP-0034` introduces a rule that requires the block height to be included in the coinbase field
```

> of the coinbase transaction. One of the reason for the change was to make

Reviewer: As far as I can tell, the rest of BIP 34 explains the activation mechanism of BIP 34, so I would claim that this is the main reason.

```suggestion
of the coinbase transaction. The main reason for the change was to make
```

coinbase transactions unique so that the expensive check of going through the
UTXO set wouldn't be needed. However, there were blocks in the past that had

> random bytes that could be interpreted as block heights. The lowest block
> heights are: 209,921, 490,897, and 1,983,702.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
random bytes that could be interpreted as block heights. The lowest implicated block
heights are: 209,921, 490,897, and 1,983,702.
```

Up until block 209,921 the BIP-0030 checks are performed for non-Utreexo nodes.
Since Utreexo nodes only keep the UTXO set commitment, it's not possible to
perform the `BIP-0030` check. In theory, those blocks can't be reorged, because
of checkpoints, that goes back to block height 295,000 with the block hash
`00000000000000004d9b4ef50f0f9d686fd69db2e03af35a100370c64632a983`. Any chain that
doesn't include this block at height 295,000 isn't valid as removing this check
would be a hard-fork. We note, however, that after version `0.30`, Bitcoin Core
will remove the checkpoints[^1], as they are not needed anymore to prevent attacks
against nodes during Initial Block Download. This is effectively a hard-fork,
that will probably never actually happen, however.

Block 1,983,702 is the first block that Utreexo nodes would be in danger of a

> consensus failure due to the inability to perform the BIP-0030 checks. However,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
consensus failure due to the inability to perform the BIP-0030 checks, if someone were to reuse coinbase transaction from block 164,384 . However,
```

this block will happen in roughly 21 years from now, and some mitigations have been
proposed [^2].

### Historical BIP-0030 violations

> There were two UTXOs that were overwritten due to this consensus rule are:

Reviewer: Not due to this rule, but rather before it was introduced:

```suggestion
There were two UTXOs that were overwritten by repeated transactions:
```

`e3bf3d07d4b0375638d5f1db5255fe07ba2c4cb067cd81b84ee974b6585fb468:0` at block height 91,722
`d5d27987d2a3dfc724e359870c6644b40e497bdc0589a033220fe15429d88599:0` at block height 91,812

Since the leaf hashes that are committed to the Utreexo accumulator commit to
the block hash as well, all the leaf hashes are unique and the two historical
violations do not happen with how the UTXO set is represented with the Utreexo

> accumulator. To be consensus compatible with clients that do have the historical
> violations, the leaves representing these two UTXOs in the Utreexo accumulator
> are hardcoded as unspendable.

Reviewer: If I’m understanding this right:

```suggestion
accumulator. To be consensus compatible with clients that retain only the second
occurrences of these outputs, the leaves representing the corresponding first UTXOs in the Utreexo accumulator
are hardcoded as unspendable.
```

Utreexo accumulator itself, for that see BIP-????. This document is only concerned with
the general rules for validating blocks and transactions using the Utreexo,
so that all Utreexo nodes can stay in consensus with one another.

## Motivation

The Bitcoin network is composed of a set of nodes that validate blocks and
transactions as they are received. These nodes need to keep track of the current state of the network in order to
fulfill their role. Most importantly, they must maintain a record of all coins that
have been created but not yet spent—a collection known as the UTXO set.

This set is typically stored in a database that must be accessed frequently and cannot
be pruned. As a result, the cost of running a node is directly tied to the size
of the UTXO set. Since it can grow indefinitely—bounded only by block size—it represents a
long-term scalability concern.

Utreexo is a dynamic accumulator that enables the UTXO set to be represented in just a few kilobytes,
by requiring peers to provide additional proof data to verify the inclusion of a UTXO in the
accumulator. This allows for the construction of extremely lightweight nodes capable of performing

> the same validation as a full node, without the need to store the entire UTXO set.

Reviewer 2: The preceding 3 paragraphs seem to be duplicates of the accumulator BIP that this BIP requires. Can perhaps remove them or refer to the accumulator BIP motivation.

random bytes that could be interpreted as block heights. The lowest block
heights are: 209,921, 490,897, and 1,983,702.

Up until block 209,921 the BIP-0030 checks are performed for non-Utreexo nodes.
Since Utreexo nodes only keep the UTXO set commitment, it's not possible to
perform the `BIP-0030` check. In theory, those blocks can't be reorged, because
of checkpoints, that goes back to block height 295,000 with the block hash
`00000000000000004d9b4ef50f0f9d686fd69db2e03af35a100370c64632a983`. Any chain that
doesn't include this block at height 295,000 isn't valid as removing this check
would be a hard-fork. We note, however, that after version `0.30`, Bitcoin Core
will remove the checkpoints[^1], as they are not needed anymore to prevent attacks
against nodes during Initial Block Download. This is effectively a hard-fork,
that will probably never actually happen, however.

Block 1,983,702 is the first block that Utreexo nodes would be in danger of a
consensus failure due to the inability to perform the BIP-0030 checks. However,
this block will happen in roughly 21 years from now, and some mitigations have been
proposed [^2].

### Historical BIP-0030 violations

> There were two UTXOs that were overwritten due to this consensus rule are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There were two UTXOs that were overwritten due to this consensus rule:
```
